So this Anurandha Sutra, which I said is asking what is the exalted deliverance of mind
and what is the immeasurable deliverance of mind, and the exalted hieropic abides resolved
upon an area the size of root of one tree, pervading it as exalted, this is called an exalted
deliverance of mind, and then it goes on further two, three trees, a size of a village,
it's a point being, even that the smaller it has a root of a tree, basically you start
exalting your mind literally on the phenomena that's larger than your body, that it's present
at here right now, larger than your body but related to your body, not just through your
body being seated, the root of the tree but also being composed of the four great elements.
So it's enough, you don't have to exalt your mind to the casinos of earth and so on,
but it's enough just a room, just a floor that's wider than you, so it's a goody, goody
because again if you make it personal, if you see that that goody is composed of four
great elements that compose this very body because of which you can think, feel, intend,
decide, just do anything but because of which you exist really, and you recognize, yeah,
the quicky of the root of the tree, it will come to destruction, it will come to defamation,
what is to be said for this body that's inferior to that, that's going to happen even soon
even quicker, so just the knowledge of that, you don't have to then destroy the tree to
prove it yourself or destroy this body, to prove it yourself, which would be a contradiction,
but just the knowledge that it's a subject to destruction that pertains to you, to your
body, to your center, to the center of your world, which is this physical body, it's
enough for dispassion and for not regarding that body is yours, not taking it up, not
appropriating it, it's also kind of, it's also kind of training to enlarge it in the
mind.
Yeah, the establishment on a great phenomenon, but I've seen two things at once, but for
the establishment is, it doesn't mean you just start thinking about the roots of the
trees or villages, means there has to be that dependence established, that connection
between the presence of the phenomenon of the greater kind, in relation to the phenomenon
of this body right here, right now, so it's not just enough to think about mountains and
elements or whatever else, you need to think in relation to this body, and what is the
relation, it's the simultaneous presence of these very four great elements that are
comprising all these mountains, all these trees, this whole quality of the tree, including
these body, these senses, these fresh elements, because of which I am, which I think I am.
So all of that, my whole world can be swept away, and it is undermined through a simple
possibility of being swept away, by these great elements, by the matter that's out of
your control, because if that changes, if that decides, if your heart decides to stop,
or whatever reason, you don't know what's floating on your veins, you might block it, just,
like there you go, I mean even these things that pertain to your body would be enough
to recognize that you have absolutely no say in the operation of your organs and the
fleshy senses, sense organ, because yet your whole world is known as your world because
of that, so when they go, your world cannot remain, not even for a second.
But yeah, you can establish your mind with those greater things, so me walking in the
village, me in the village, by the mountains, and so on, and have that mountain range as
my, as far as my life is going.
Yes, yes.
Wow, I'm not losing something, my body, my situation, yeah.
It's within that.
It's simultaneously present within that.
That's the whole point, so it's not one and two, it's like one within one.
But do I have to think about that?
No, no, that's the thing.
Well, you have to think about it when the mind is not established upon it, when the mind
gets established upon it, because it's true, your body is within that, which means through
your body you can see that, so then your body, the presence of the elements of your body,
keep your mind established upon the greater phenomenon of those elements, which is the
mountain, which is the mountain range, which is the, or, or the other sort of the perceptions
of the forest, your mind is established in a, cause forest is created in the little village,
so your mind is established upon the perceptions of the forest, so when you go in the village,
nothing can be such a day, but as I said, it needs to be made personal, it's not, it's
not an abstract pondering on, you know, the composition of the rocks of the mountain
range or something, it's basically seeing your body within that and seeing that through
your body.
So in the same sense, on top of the mountain range, there are trees being, being swung
by the wind, there's the rolling rocks, there are, I don't know, crumbling dust of, of
soil or whatever else, on a more particular level, there are elements, yeah, your nails are
growing, your body is moving around, you're sweating, you're very rising the water in the
river.
Rising the water over the river, yeah, passing the water out from your body, just, it
is, is the elements moving, so you start seeing your body as pertaining to that, that will
result eventually in you not regarding your body as pertaining to you.
Because I was, I wasn't when you're going into that composition, that kind of composition,
I was more just expanding the mind, my body there surrounded within this, you know, as far
as being.
But the point is to learn how to keep seeing it within your body, so when you're moving
as that sort of says, when you establish the mind upon the perception of the forest, when
you go into the village and you see sites, you see things that were usually provoked,
lost or anger or so on, you wouldn't, because the mind remains established upon the perceptions
of the forest.
So you don't want to have to, just, oh, I must sit motionless, cross like for three hours
to practice this, you might start like that without distractions, but the point of that
establishment is to disregard your body regardless of the posture, regardless of its activity.
Not just to have the establishment when you're seated in motionless, because I wouldn't
be really an establishment.
So when your body is seated, lying down, standing up or walking, the mind remains established
upon the great phenomena, that's basically your body within that already.
So that's the thing.
It's the discernment that your body's already within that.
You don't need to fabricate anything.
You just have to discern it right away, because it is already there.
There's the actual shooter after that.
There it is, and the good is questioning, I'm a rudder, and he says, how do you abide
in meditation?
He says, vulnerable, so as we abide here, diligent, hard and resolute, we perceive
both light and a vision of form.
Soon after, it was the light and the vision of form to disappear, but we have not discovered
the cause for that.
Yeah, well, I remember that in this, and there are lots of notes on Pali, so that translation
to read it out now, he has quite a good chance of being very subjective.
So you have to get a few different translations, the extra Pali as well, and then work on it.
But go on, read the whole thing, let's see.
You should discover the rules for that, and he says, before my enlightenment, while I
was still only enlightened, I too perceive both light and a vision of forms.
Soon after, the light and the vision of forms disappeared, I thought, what is the cause
and condition why the light and the vision of forms have disappeared, and I considered
those doubts of those in me, and because of their doubts, my concentration fell away,
and my concentration fell away, my composure fell away, and the light and vision of form
disappeared.
I shall so that I shall so that their doubts will not arise in me again.
And then sometimes, as he sees, as he just light and just forms both, you know, I was
just wondering about the whole light and forms.
Well, what is the part of it, because I mean, you know, he was translating, well, is it
a non-indicative consciousness, that consciousness doesn't indicate anything, he was translating
consciousness, that it's luminous all around, and what does that mean?
So when he comes to these things, light and vision of forms, and I think there might
be different connotations that could probably make more sense.
So that's why I say, you get a little part of it, because it seems that you can see
the separation, you can see forms, you can see light.
So in a way, yes, because any form of manifestation of phenomena, even as a thought, requires
it's, well, it's rising, it's manifestation, which means there is a degree of light in
regard to it, because if there is no degree of light in regard to it, it just would not
be discerned against the nothingness, it can't basically normalize it.
So even if you think about, I don't know, something like, like fleeting movements, just
make movements, just nothing particular that I've thought, that ponder on the nature,
even that is discerned to an extent, to a very ambiguous extent, obviously, it's not
clearly defined as the object of the senses.
So as I said before, no matter how remote these thoughts are, they are valid phenomena.
And it's such, they have a reason, which means there is a degree of light in that.
So that's, like if your mind were to be established upon the degree of light in regard
to anything and everything that arises, means you'd be established in regard to everything
and anything that arises, very similarly, the Buddha did say, the ultimate, the highest
of the all casinos is casinos consciousness, which is casinos unknown, not arising in
regard to the arising, it's because of that, so it's because of it that arising is possible
to be discerned.
So consciousness is the ultimate negative, it doesn't appear, because you're always conscious
of, or other things that are conscious of, that's what I mean when I say consciousness
is out there with a form, I mean, I don't mean it's actually the light that form, it's
a completely separate, a different thing, but it's out there paired with a form on the
same, well on the same level that it's below your feet, you can't even conceal, entering
it, or even thinking about it, because whatever you think, you're already conscious of, that's
what you're able to think of, which means consciousness and the matter in regard to
it are kind of prerequisite, so even if you say, I say, okay, think about darkness, there's
an element of light in regard to that, that's what I'm thinking of, yes, there's very
kind of, yes, that's very subtle, but imagine your mind gets, and yes, imagine, because
through imagination, along the right lines, you will start getting clear picture, which
means you will be able, well, means your thoughts will be less and less of an abstraction,
as we spoke before, and will become more valid representations of what it actually is,
and that's how this seminar happens, so if the mind, as I said, imagine, if the mind
is composed to such extent, the discernment of light in regard to things that are manifested,
that are enduring already manifested, you sum out anything that arises, because in a way
that all of that is because of that light in regard to it, but then obviously, the light
in regard to it will not be discerned if there is nothing that is like shining up, so
to speak, or you know, I don't like that, coming because it implies the direction, usually
people think I'm shining the light, no, let's say like this, the light will not be discerned
because the things that arise, well, will not reveal, and as you will know, they like,
so there is no light with other things, so you don't start assuming that the light is
eternal and things are just being revealed by this massive torch, no, light is to the
extent of the things arising, but it's not the things arising, but it actually belongs
to things more than it belongs to you, or are it completely belongs to things, in the
same sense that matter is paired with consciousness, not you, you're not paired with consciousness,
you don't have consciousness, matter is paired with it, external, in that like the nature
of juxtaposition, so it's not, it's not even that the matter is conscious, or consciousness
possesses matter, no, it's just matter, consciousness, two entirely separate entities, they're the
juxtaposed together, as a result of that juxtaposition, you have your whole life, your whole
experience, so everything, and that's when they're always below your feet, that juxtaposition,
that's the ratio between matter and consciousness, he's just, well, you can't even think it,
accurately, or rather, the only way to think it accurately is to stop assuming it entirely,
you're saying about, talk about movement, intention, movement,
not, because another word for intention, pretty much, it's a light movement, because everything
has a movement, there's movement, individuality, there's a set, just, even the nature of duration,
like something is taking time, something is enduring in time, that's already a form of movement,
and such that movement is a nature of intention, that is what intention is, movement,
that's where it's the most easiest to appropriate, to move,
and also the stance for the sense of control, you know, you are, you are moving it,
planning it, applying it, withdrawing it, moving, oh, I am doing this, but the movement,
in itself, it's a phenomenon that's indifferent to you, there would be a way without you,
so you're like, oh, I can't even control that, even my own intentions, the nature of those intentions
cannot be my own, that's the easiest to appropriate, the easiest to take, because in the way
the movement is also negative in regard to things that move, so you have solid objects,
immuable objects, so it's big, that then they move, as we spoke before, you throw a cup,
the movement, it's not the cup, obviously, but then there wouldn't be a movement of the cup,
if there is no discernible phenomenon of a solid immuable cup, and when I say immuable,
I mean immuable in itself, not immuable as a whole, that you can move from point A to point B,
so the nature of the movement, it's not the things that move, movement is not things that move,
but then there would be no movement if there's nothing to be moved, so the movement depends on
things that can move, and things that can move, well, they're determined as things,
they're determined in the movement, because they can move,
because if the cup suddenly starts moving, it melts away, it ceases to be the cup,
but then obviously now you have this melted steel of this metal cup,
well now that becomes a thing, it's kind of a bit more movable, but even that movement in
regard to the matter of that thing, the matter is not movement, but there wouldn't be no movement,
it has no matter, just in concealer, so basically the planes of movement, the possibility of movement,
is already given to you beforehand, by that relationship, by that external relationship of
matter and consciousness, that's how you disown the movement as well, the most personal
of the intention choices, intentional intentions, attention, that's like the primary movement you do,
you attend this one account of that, you move from that to this, you choose to stay with that,
which means you keep moving back to that, so that thing is enduring because it holds your interest,
and you know when people's minds are all over the place, when they can't keep the attention,
it's just the movement, it's just so weak, the mind is just flying everywhere, and they're
moved with it, but even that possibility of the movement, it's possible only because there is
matter, that's very consciousness out there, external to you, so the planes of the movement,
that the space, the element of space, is already revealed to you as a result of that external
relationship, two movements are bounded within that space, well yeah, yeah, of course, yeah,
exactly, yeah, that's why space, although it's not like the fundamental element in terms of
the four great elements, is sometimes realistic, because you know there's like four great elements,
and then it's listed as earth, water, fire, air, space, and consciousness, so the six elements,
and that's what I'm talking about when I say the external relationship, the external relationship
or the earth, water, fire, air, jacks supposed to be consciousness, results, or rather generates
the phenomenon of space within which movement is possible, so the mind gets established upon
the phenomenon of space, means nothing that moves within that space can be appropriate, because
you're established upon the greater phenomena within which these things occur, in the same
sense as we spoke before, you establish upon the phenomena of these great mountains you live on,
and then whatever happens to it within the presence of the mountains,
so any sorrow, grief, joy, elation pertains to this tiny, literally significant body within
this great notion of space, valid notion of space, not kind of sort of projected mystical
whatever else, spaciousness, I don't want to call it not, the notion of space, there is present
within which this movement is possible, movement reveals the space, things in space move,
so movement in regards to things basically it's what intention is, hence things are intentional,
things move, possibilities, that's already form movement, thoughts basically, possibilities are
the same as thoughts, you have a cup, you can use it to drink from it, and the mind, that's already
mind, that's already made a movement, now if you decide to use it for drinking, then you made a
movement on top of the movement, but even the still possibility of a cup to be drunk from,
then already implies the direction that now can be followed,
and there's nothing to do with it, there's everything to do with the cup as a reason phenomena,
and that's why you can intend to follow what has been given as a possibility,
so to watch, movement, to watch, if you, if you start to shaman upon the nature of the movement,
that won't be movement, which means you won't be affected by anything that moves, and that's pretty much
everything, hence the, the, the, the, the scenery, the, the metaphor of, of immovable,
here you got to tell it, because you're surrounded in the nature of movement, and what is nature to move,
form as a nature to move, feeling as nature to move, perception as a nature to move, intentions,
some, determinations, some kind of as a nature to move, consciousness as a nature to move,
there's anything that appears, exactly, anything that no matter how vaguely, how remotely, how
beautifully marked appear, to that extent it moves, because as I said, even just pure,
you know, like almost arising, ceasing, resisting, while changing, enduring, that's already movement,
that motion of time is a movement, the nature of movement, everything, your thoughts,
your feelings, your intentions, your perceptions, by arising, by ceasing, by resisting,
watching, enduring, that's already movement, that's movement, mind gets established upon the nature of movement,
nothing that the picture of the moves will be able to affect you, because movement is there,
but again, you know, that establishing mind upon that, that movement needs to be taken personal,
needs to be pertaining to that which you take to be yourself, needs to be determined, needs to be
bound by, so then by disowning the movement, then you will be unable to hold this thing to be yours,
perception, feeling, you describe, you describe the feelings, you can feel it, feeling, and that's
movement here, which is what your intention is, feelings move, yeah, well, your intention is to feel it moves,
yeah, feelings, feelings, feelings, yeah, then you, they persist there, there's movement in this
and there, more general movement, but obviously the most particular movement, the one that's
attention is the most immediate movement, while you're attending, while you're choosing to keep
attending, because by choosing to attend something, you always have to attend on expense of something
else, then even if your mind is moving around, jumping around, you can be quite established because
if your intention is to, yeah, because you are not being moved by the champion mind,
yeah, because you're paying, can you pay attention to the attention, well, you can't be attending
your attention, but you can certainly discern the roots of your attention, so your attention has
to direct itself at something, but it doesn't mean that your whole vision has to be taken with that
100%, so in other words, by attending something, you can remain aware of the background of that
attention that's attending this particular thing, and that's nothing than developing your
own insomanasica, nothing, that's exactly the thing, the root, the boom of your attention,
where the attention comes from, so to speak, so by remaining mindful, establish
discerning the background in regard to that which is being attended to,
you're getting the picture of the whole direction, the whole direction of the movement,
and by dwelling, rather by discerning sufficiently enough, the whole direction of the movement,
you realize that there is no room for your sense of self in that movement,
it's only because movement, it's easy to ignore, that movement becomes my movement, the movement
of me, the symbol that stands for my sense of control, for my appropriation, because it moves,
that's why it's easy to ignore, not see, that's why a Vigia Patria sankara,
through that ignoring, that movement becomes the determination of self.
It's one thing I always, not a Vigia, says, mentioned on that. Intentions may be regarded
basically as the relation between actual and possible, relationship between actual and possible,
in what we're just talking about now, how it is, you said the movement is, one moment
is determined by the possibility of things to be moved,
hence Nenevira was also talking about space, not there specifically, but talking about the
intentions, is the presence of intention that basically correlates to the notion of space and
the three dimensions, but that's what unnecessarily detail really, the point is it, it ties in with what
you just read, as I said, possibility of, and a reason thing, I know that thing, so they're
possible and there isn't things actual, but the possibilities are the directions that you can move
that thing towards, and by thinking the possibilities, you're already moving, hence the movement,
the, sorry, the thoughts, the intentions towards those possibilities are determined by possible
and the actual, actual. It says the immeasurable deliverance of mind, what is, what is that? Yeah,
big goodbye to pervading one quarter of the mind of Nenevira's loving kindness, like was a second,
like was a third, fourth, below or around the number where, has to always to himself. So he
establishes mind, his mind, instead of saying in a matter of kindness, he could establish his
mind on non-yelwill, or non-melons, or is he compassion on cruelty or something. So I think
we spoke about it before, and yeah, that's probably why you're mentioning it, like non-yelwill
is greater than your will, because your will is always in regard to particular things. So,
if he says, yeah, you can't afford my eyes, loving kindness, compassion, altruistic joy,
and equanimity, and it says, abundant, exalted, immeasurable, and always says, without hostility
and without ill will, your mind is a blind, loving kindness,
that can't he just abide with the mind of non-yelwill,
that is the mind of loving kindness, so that he doesn't generate a mind of kindness.
Not intentionally, as people think you should do it, it's generated indirectly through establishing
your mind in non-hostility and non-yelwill, if you establish yourself long enough for a sufficient
degree, in that result, that experience, what you'll experience in the time is the experience of
loving kindness. Between the experience of loving kindness is determined by your establishment
upon non-hostility and non-yelwill. That's why you can't appropriate, that's why the Buddha did
praise Bramuri Haras, and they can lead you to our own chip and full destruction of the fetus,
because inasmuch like Janus, you can't appropriate, you can't I am feeling matter,
because there wouldn't be matter, if there is a sense of self in regard to it.
But if your sense of self is concerned about non-hostility and non-yelwill and sticks to that,
then eventually becomes redundant, and the result of that is the experience of loving kindness,
and then you can you can intend it, you can whatever, build, build on top of that, go further,
and it all eventually results in economity, immoral, but you don't do that, you don't,
and that's why, yeah, that's why it's quite, well, it's quite dangerous in a way,
because people read for Bramuri Haras, and you think, oh nah, I just had to start thinking positive,
it's all too good, thoughts, people, relationships. That's fine, you can think that, but don't
think that that is the practice of Bramuri Haras, because then you will never make the effort to
find out what an extra practice of Bramuri Haras really is, and you can know that whatever you're doing,
you're not the practice of Bramuri Haras, because you're not an arahant, because if you were to do it,
not even then long, it could result, it could result to the correctly, you would result
destruction of all fetters, because it undermines the very framework of the sense of self,
in regard to me, in regard to others, in regard to both, in regard to neither.
There is no room for self in them, in the same sense, there's no room for self in Janus,
which is why Bramuri Haras can also be used to then establish a mind into a genre upon them,
depending on how you start attending to sticks.
So you abide without his mind, without hostility, without your will.
And as you've seen, your will is not your will, is a greater phenomenon.
Yeah, your will is much smaller, much more particular.
Well, it means in particular, you can't have your will in the general manner,
because even then, if you're like generally bad mood, well, that becomes a particular thing.
So your will is always directional, because of that, no new will is always greater,
it's always the basis of it.
So if someone was abiding most of the time, not your will, or attending to that phenomenon,
and they get angry, but I can't really get angry that much.
No, the displeasing, the disagreeable circumstances, if their mind is established,
if they'd well often, as they would have said, you should well often in these states,
then they will kind of rise.
It's basically like heating the pan.
If the pan is just mildly warm, when you throw the water, well the water will linger.
But imagine you keep warming up that pan for quite some time, and it's red hot.
No matter how much water you check on it, it will just pshh, you'll need to evaporate, go.
So put the lingerer up, but then you know, you get careless, the fire drops down,
cools down, then even the tiny drop of water will linger a long time, if it's a cold pan.
That's the same with the mind.
If the mind doesn't dwell upon the notions, the abstractions of non-year will,
just think abstractly, what it is to have non-melos and non-hostility.
Dwell on that long enough.
Don't actively try to love people or anything like that.
That's already the particularizing of that thing, which is a mistake.
The result of non-hostility and non-year will be a genuine loving kindness.
A loving kindness that doesn't induce the sense of self, that doesn't induce the sense of
conceit. Loving kindness is just pure framework of me and others, neither of us can really own
what we think we own. Thus you just have loving kindness. Compassion.
Compassion to the kind of indifferent framework of your experience as it is.
But you can't, or other, you can get that directly through this indirect practice,
which is in a way, in itself, on its own.
It's a direct way, so to speak.
But it's not a direct way from what people think, it's a direct way.
I am spreading beams of loving kindness.
As I'm going to point it out, so if you're radiating beams of loving kindness,
what would you do when it comes to a pecker?
How can you radiate beams of indifference? How does that work?
I'm sending you the beams of my econymity.
I'm moving these beams towards you of this immobility.
It's just nonsense.
Yeah, it was always a painful practice.
Contrary, it's a very controlled practice.
It doesn't hear you in an eloquent way.
Of course, you know, it's very eloquent, if it's unrightly.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, I mean, almost f, because that's the effortless.
It's because it's not over yet, not over yet.
Because all I have to do is pay attention and make sure
non-illwill, non-hostility prevails.
So all I have to do is guard the gates, so to speak.
And the more 45-year gates are, the less things will be going through of your will and hostility.
And when that becomes a state you abide in, often enough, that's your bravavigada.
3-0 is meta.
Mudita, Karuna, and then just complete immobility in regard to order.
Yeah, equanimity.
Because meta-mudita, Karuna, are the subtle movements.
But they are so subtle, so neutral.
And then you can be based for the full destruction of fetters.
And I don't understand you.
Which can result in an economy?
Inasmuch, you need only one first jhana to dwell in it sufficiently enough,
abiding it, and then all the fetters will fall off and you'll be an island.
Yeah, because you don't need the extra jhana,
you need the strength of the mind that pertains to the actual first jhana.
But you can have different means of practice.
You can arrive at that island and try to run with others,
even if you never thought about it, heard about the jhana.
So it's just a form of establishment of your mind, the way you can establish your mind.
But when the word says, oh, you need the first jhana as a basis for the destruction of tains,
means you need that strength of mind that corresponds to the first jhana.
And which would correspond to that? To various other things as well,
but they were talking about jhana at the time.
It does seem to suggest in the city's value, if you...
if there's the filaments, you can still establish your mind on these nine-year-old world,
but you might have other defalments coming up.
But your mind still can be established.
And the more established it gets, the less lingering the filaments would be.
Yeah, and he's obviously talking about you, someone's doing that, and they've got,
it's like that you get to be born into one of the pure birds of pure.
Yeah, in quite subtle realms.
Yeah, the god's filed radians or the gods of the pure radians.
Yeah, yeah.
They measure the radians of the limited radians.
So it depends on how strong you're.
Depending on how else do you mind with the binding, it does define...
Well, yeah, relatively refined states.
They're refined from pututions from the view.
But, yeah, if your mind starts abiding and non-hacillic,
non-year-old gets established upon Brahmavihars, that is your body.
That is your state.
It's nothing.
I mean, you still perceive how this is more refined than what I used to do.
Where I used to think, where I used to feel.
But now it's the state that you have.
So now you can recognize, oh, there is...
You know, when they said it, they put the things about jhana,
and they said he gets established in this, and it's great,
and it's mindfulness up.
Is there more?
There is more.
But it's an answer to go from more.
For as long as you get the principle out of it,
fully developed in you, you can run.
Then you can go wherever you want to go or not.
But yeah, for somebody who doesn't become run by the barge of those states,
then the Buddha did say,
oh, that these realms of rebirth correspond to
binding those mental states, which is consequently
abiding in the mental states that refuse with last
version delusion.
Well, but corresponds to that, it's the animal around.
If you're lucky.
If you're going to be the user,
correct, you can view upon these god realms.
It's kind of.
What's the unfortunate thing?
It's still a delusion, it's still a delusion.
It's pleasurable, but it's still you have to go through with it.
And it still comes to an end.
One, if your efforts towards
for a hundred,
what do you mean?
Like if you get your born in this garden?
No, of course not.
Your efforts to the barge cannot possibly waste it.
That's why you're saying this most of it's there.
Well, no, that's how you become, like that's how sometimes people
over a course of lifetimes build up in health,
and then they become out of hands.
Because all the efforts from the previous lives,
it's already not always.
Nothing can go to waste.
Well, sensuality goes to waste.
Your will goes to waste.
Ignorance goes to waste.
Any effort made for our prodios cannot possibly go to waste.
You might not get the immediate result,
but it's like again, like a drop drop drop in the ocean.
Bit by bit by bit by bit.
If you fill up the entire ocean.
So it usually happens based on the suit.
So when people did pass away with them at the previous Buddha,
they obviously go inspired,
made offerings, lived with the exalted mind,
then they got reborn in some great realms,
enjoyed the celestial pleasures,
and they passed away from there and reappeared again
as humans and then fulfilled and became our hands.
Now it seems like great man,
I get all this pleasure and I become an arahant.
No, the greatest pleasure is to become an arahant.
So you're just delaying your pleasure through being reborn
in these celestial realms.
They can last for years.
You could in this way, for years.
That's, you know, you don't have a way that way.
It's better than nothing is.
Sure, better than nothing.
Better than I remember them.
But still.
But if the efforts were generally naming a Mibana,
that cannot go to waste.
Impossible.
Yeah.
That's what the Buddha meant.
Like if you cultivate the right view for a fingers net,
if you cultivate loving kindness for a fingers net,
that's how you make streams of merit.
Because merit pertains to the future benefits of your present action.
So through counting, through applying yourself,
like you make merit through giving and offering.
But that's nothing.
In comparison to merit that you get
through having a fingers net of the right view.
You know, fingers net of genre,
fingers net of Ramavihara's.
So you need to, you know, you need to have the fingers net
of the right thing.
Yeah.
Because I want to qualify that.
Because then, you know, you do have people as well.
As long as I'm trying, I'll make merit and I'll be fine.
No, necessarily.
If you're trying the wrong thing,
if you're following the wrong teachings,
if you're following things that cannot lead to understanding,
well, you don't have the fingers net,
even the fingers net of the right view.
So it's not easy.
But it is done.
Even those fleeting moments of the right view
or this streams of merit,
which means yeah, exactly that in the future.
Lots of benefits from it.
Someone could say that most people abide in not your will.
Yeah, but not most of the time I'm said a bit.
You're right, except when I'm not.
Except when I'm not in any, you know, once.
Oh, I keep the precepts.
Except when I don't.
Yeah.
But that's nothing in comparison to the time I spend
keeping the precepts,
thus my precepts are much greater.
Yeah.
Come on, mind is not.
I'm like an angel too.
Yeah, but there is a difference in,
you know, in knowingly abiding in on your will
and being delusional about it.
Not knowing.
Not knowing exactly.
Do you know what a phenomenon on your will is?
You don't.
So how can you possibly be abiding it?
You know.
Your mind.
In delusion, exactly.
You know, it's not even better.
So your mind is where your real will is.
It's just that your will is not always present.
But delusion certainly is,
which is why in the base of that delusion,
you can have ill-gularizing,
you can have hostility,
lust,
that's why delusion is the most fundamental
for all of the unwholesome states.
It's the basis from which they sprang out.